Cooperation is a very useful ability for organisms of all sizes. According to inclusive fitness theory you will do well if you're part of a cooperative and altruistic group, so cooperation is beneficial for everyone. Being cooperative is costly, though--you have to expend energy producing public goods that you could use to otherwise help yourself. Indeed, in many cooperative systems there are cheaters, organisms that don't contribute to the group but leech off of the public resources the group creates. In nearly every cooperative system this happens, from roads to public libraries to e coli. If there are too many cheaters though the cooperative population will collapse.

To prevent this, cooperators have evolved systems to prevent contributing to cheaters. One of these such systems is called 'quorum sensing.' Quorum sensing is where organisms produce a signal compound, called 'autoinducer' (AI), which is released into the environment. Organisms can then check the environment and use the concentration of AI to regulate certain behaviours. Quorum sensing has several other applications as well, such as delaying cooperative behaviour until the population is at a high enough density that cooperating would be more effective, but this research focuses primarily on the anti-cheating aspects of it.

Quorum sensing has been studied reasonably well in biology. Its applications in food safety and viral virulence make it an attractive topic, though there are several difficulties in studying the system from a biological perspective. For one, we don't understand how quorum sensing evolved in the first place. We don't know which environments it does best in, if organisms cooperate only some of them time or all of the time, what AI thresholds they require before they begin cooperating and many other questions. These questions are difficult to answer in biological systems for several reasons: A) working on an evolutionary timescale is difficult for research, B) biologists can't track exactly what an organism is doing on a microscopic scale, play-by-play style, C) biologists have to work with the organisms that nature gives them, or at least something somewhat close to what's already in nature. For that reason we tackled this problem from a digital evolution perspective.

We constructed a model of a biological quorum-sensing public-goods producing system in the computer. We made sure the system we build mirrored a known biological system, using data we could collect from both sides. As far as we can tell the model reliably mirrors a biological system, so it should reliably predict aspects of the biological systems that haven't been studied yet. This means we can use it to study the aspects of quorum sensing that can't be easily seen from the biology perspective!


